Mumbai: The family of Ishrat Jahan, who was killed by the Gujarat Police in 2004, today alleged threat to their lives. "At 2:30 in the night, someone knocked on our door, when we asked them six-seven times who they were, they said they were policemen, they kept telling us to open the door. You tell us in which law is it written that police came come to your house at 2:30 in the night and force you to open the door, we are being threatened in every way possible, we don't feel safe," they said while addressing a press conference in Mumbai.They also claimed that wherever they go, there are cars following them. The family's lawyer, Vrinda Grover, has written to the government alleging threat.The Home Ministry says they will provide security to the family. "If we get a request from Ishrat's family, we will give security," said Home Minister Sushil Kumar Shinde. Even the Maharashtra DGP in the past had said he is ready to give security to Ishrat's family. Last month when Ishrat's mother and uncle were en route from Gujarat to Mumbai, someone had opened fired on their car.Ishrat and her friend Javed Shaikh, alias Pranesh Pillai and two Pakistani nationals Amjadali Akbarali Rana and Zeeshan Johar, were killed near Ahmedabad by a team of Gujarat CrimeBranch officials on June 15, 2004.The CBI which filed its first chargesheet in the case last week, claims that Ishrat, a 19-year-old college student, was shot dead in a staged encounter in "cold blood." The agency said the killing was a joint operation between the Gujarat Police and the state's Intelligence Bureau.Seven policemen have been accused of charges that include conspiracy, murder, and destruction of evidence. They include top officers DG Vanzara, already in jail, and PP Pande, who is absconding.The CBI also said that it will further investigate the alleged roles of Rajendra Kumar, who was then the Gujarat station chief of the Intelligence Bureau and three other officers from his agency.The state police has said that the Intelligence Bureau had warned that Ishrat and the others were planning to assassinate the chief minister. But the CBI says the four people were illegally confined at three different farmhouses for days before the encounter on June 15, 2004 and that the weapons that were found near their bodies, which included an AK-56, were supplied by the Intelligence Bureau. For NDTV Updates,