And that is without any growth at all.  But you need to grow enough to keep up with cancellations at minimum, so that consumes the last notion of profitability.
Successful, profitable SaaS companies at scale (certainly by $30m/yr revenue, but should to be paying attention to this stuff by $5m/yr), do several things to make the math work:
Undo the effect of cancellations through up-sells/upgrades.  Salesforce.com and ZenDesk charge more for every person you add, and more per person when you increase the features in your plan.  Their customers grow (on average).  Thus, their revenue over four years is not 4R, but rather it might be R on the first year, 1.5R on the second, 2R on the third, etc., so perhaps 7R in four years.  That drastically changes the equation, because cost to “acquire” the customer doesn’t go up, and in general R&D and Admin don’t either. Taking “rate of cancellations” minus “rate of upgrades” is called “net churn.”  Getting to zero net-churn is a big step in getting profitable; the most successful SaaS companies have negative net churn.  It’s not just pure software companies that achieve this — hardware/server SaaS company Rackspace also has negative net churn, which enables them to grow revenues 30% year-over-year with $1.5 billion in revenue and $300m in profit.
Use viral growth to offset cancellations.  Few B2B companies can truly claim “viral growth” characteristics.  But for the few who do, they can maintain growth rates of X%/yr where X is much larger than cancellation, and do so with very little acquisition costs.  In this case, cancellation never “catches up,” and you win.
Drastically reduce the cost of customer acquisition.  An 18-month pay-back period is a killer.  If customers can be found with paid advertising, if they can sign up without talking to a sales person, if they can learn the product through in-product tutorials, great documentation, and how-to videos, if they can import their data without assistance, if they can demonstrate value to the purse-string-holders without a sales person writing the presentation for them, then the cost of cancellation-replacement and proper growth becomes small enough that it’s no longer a barrier to profitability, even under conditions of growth.
Drastically improve GPM.  It’s hard for a service-oriented enterprise-sales company to not have real costs around tech support, account management, and extensive IT infrastructure, which is why even the most cost-efficient (and profitable!) enterprise-facing SaaS companies often can’t push much past 70% GPM (e.g. Salesforce.com, Rackspace).  But, companies with extremely low-touch customer service (which doesn’t necessarily mean bad customer service!) can push it way up (Google, Facebook, Freshbooks), unlocking “free money” for profitability.
Another way to think about these solutions is that a SaaS business cannot have static fundamental metrics.  The metrics themselves need to improve — lowering cancellation rates, lowering net churn, increasing GPM, reducing cost to acquire customers.  Leaving the metrics alone, and trying to “grow until profitable” doesn’t work.
It’s like the old Jackie Mason joke — A man is selling jackets at cost.  The customer asks “how can you sell at cost, how do you make any money?”  Answer: “I sell a lot of jackets!”
I still love Marketo! ;) But this is a great article. Good data, and interesting points to ponder! Thanks!
I know this post is mostly about metrics, but I think the story is a bit different from a cash perspective. Are you referring to income statement profitability only? I think it would be good to talk about cash flow mgmt vs just profitability. For instance, you mentioned an old school company that sells a $100k deal and instantly recoups the costs. Couldn’t a SaaS company run the same deal, collecting the cash up front but recognizing the revenue across the 18 month deal term? It seems important to distinguish cash flows vs recognized revenue, especially when thinking about financing.
I do agree that companies obviously need to get to profitability but cash management is critical to get to scale.
I’m not at all referring to cash-flow. Wall street financials (and all companies I’m aware of beyond their Series A) use GAAP, i.e. accrual methods.
Of course cash-flow can vary greatly due to collection times and of course CAPEX. That *is* important too, but not important in a long-term-profitable sense.
Put another way, if the *only* problem with a SaaS company is that it’s eating cash through growth, but looking great from GAAP EBITDA, that’s a perfect reason to raise money, and you’ll do so at good valuations. Later stage companies often leverage debt for that instead of investment.
I like the article (as always) but would like to hear your taken on a company closer to home: BazaarVoice.
I think basically BazaarVoice supports your argument but they are not as much of an outlier as Marketo. Thoughts?
BV is an interesting one, and I hear different interpretations from different people. Yes, there’s definitely a general tenor of conversation around whether there’s enough profit and growth, but of course that’s (now) already baked into the stock price.
The most damning thing I’ve heard is around product versus service, and how much revenue which is in fact service revenue (at associated scale and margin) is / has been reported as recurring revenue, so this lack of distinction could be making the “recurring” part look better than it really is.
Jason – do you see 75% renewal rate as a typical one? Most companies report a much higher number (I always assumed that they are not exactly telling the truth though. ;)
75% is pretty average. 85% is exemplary. What a lot of companies do is combine their renewal / upsell numbers. So a $100 renewal that upsells to $110 is counted is a 110% renewal.
In general the answer of “what’s good” varies a good bit with the type of company and the other metrics.
For example, for enterprise company you would expect higher (i.e. 80% is good, 85% is fantastic) whereas with SMB (but still B2B) 75% could be the maximum possible and 70% could be acceptable. A consumer company could be lower still, but even then it depends on whether you’re talking about a high-tech company (higher cancellations) or low-tech consumer (e.g. telco or cable companies are consumer but would die if they have 70% annual cancellation rates).
By “depends on the other metrics” I mean something like this: Support it costs only $1 to acquire a new customer, because you’re very efficient with word-of-mouth and other things. Then you can sustain very high cancellation rates and (if you’re in a huge market) everything is fine. If it costs $200-$500 to acquire — as is typical with a non-viral SMB business — then you need higher retention rates. If it costs $500 to acquire but only at $10/mo, you’re screwed if *anyone* cancels. But if it costs $500 to acquire but you make $500/mo, cancellation rate can be higher and still profitable.
So the equation of “profitability” depends on things like rate of acquisition, cost of acquisition, cancellation rate, gross margin on that rate, and so on. It’s not JUST cancellation rate.
Still, cancellation rate remains one of the most important metrics, and in particular getting to zero and then negative net churn is game-changing for *any* SaaS business.