If you want to apply, please submit your application online by 8 pm PT on March 29, 2013. Groups that submit early have a significant advantage because we have more time to read their applications.
On April 16, we'll invite the groups that seem most promising to meet us in Mountain View between April 26 and 30. We'll reimburse up to $1100 per group for travel expenses.
We decide who to fund after each day of interviews. Yes decisions will include the amount we'll invest and the percent of the company we'd want for it. We usually invest $11,000 + $3000n, where n is the number of participating founders, up to 3 (i.e. 2 founders get $17,000, 3 or more get $20,000), in return for between 2% and 10% of the company. The average is 7%.
If we invest in you, your group is expected to move to the Bay Area for June through August 2013. (You can of course leave afterward if you want, but it's a good place for a startup to be.)
After you're accepted, we'll immediately get to work helping you set up your company, if it isn't already. As soon as your company exists, we'll write a check to it for the investment. You can spend the money however you want.
Y Combinator doesn't supply office space. We have space you can use if you need to, but we expect you to work out of wherever you find to live. It is no coincidence that so many successful startups have started this way; it's the ideal setup for the initial phase.
During the 3 month cycle we'll have dinners every Tuesday for all the founders. At each dinner we'll invite an expert in some aspect of startups to speak.
We have regular office hours year round for startups who want to talk about what they're building, or get advice on dealing with investors. We also have occasional events at YC.
During and after the 3 months we introduce startups individually to people who could help them. The founders of other YC-funded companies tend to be especially helpful. There are now about 1000 of them, and they're usually very willing to give advice or make introductions.
About 11 weeks in, we organize an event called Demo Day at which the startups present to later stage investors. You can of course seek additional funding from any investor whenever you want.
YC doesn't really end after 3 months; only the dinners do. We continue to give advice and make introductions as long as founders need—and so does the informal network of YC-funded companies.
